Contributing.md, before:

# Contributing to ReadAlong Studio

Feel free to dive in! [Open an issue](https://github.com/ReadAlongs/Studio/issues/new) or submit PRs.

This repo follows the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org/version/1/3/0/) Code of Conduct.

This repo uses automated tools to standardize the formatting of code, text files and
commits.
 - [Pre-commit hooks](#pre-commit-hooks) validate and automatically apply code
   formatting rules.
 - [commitlint](#commitlint) is used as a commit message hook to validate that
   commit messages follow the convention.

## TL;DR

Run these commands in each of your sandboxes to enable our pre-commit hooks and commitlint:

```sh
pre-commit install
npm install
```

## Pre-commit hooks

The ReadAlong Studio team has agreed to systematically use a number of pre-commit hooks to
normalize formatting of code. You need to install and enable pre-commit to have these used
when you do your own commits.

Pre-commit hooks enabled:
- check-yaml validates YAML files
- end-of-file-fixer makes sure each text file ends with exactly one newline character
- trailing-whitespace removes superfluous whitespace at the end of lines in text files
- [Flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/) enforces good Python style rules; more info about
  using Flake8 in pre-commit hooks at:
  [Lj Miranda flake8 blog post](https://ljvmiranda921.github.io/notebook/2018/06/21/precommits-using-black-and-flake8/)
- [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) orders python imports in a standard way
- [Black](https://github.com/psf/black), the Uncompromising Code Formatter, refortmats all
  Python code according to very strict rules we've agreed to follow; more info about Black
  formatting rules in
  [The Black code style](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/the_black_code_style.html)
- [mypy](http://mypy-lang.org/) runs type checking for any statically-typed Python code in
  the repo

### Enabling pre-commit hooks

All the pre-commit hooks are executed using a tool called
[pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/). Once you enable pre-commit, it will run all the
hooks each time you try to commit anything in this repo.

We've listed all the developper dependencies for the project in
[requirements.dev.txt](requirements.dev.txt) to make them easy to install:

```sh
pip install -r requirements.dev.txt
pre-commit install
```

Note that you have to run the second command in every Studio sandbox you create, so please
don't forget to do so when you clone a new sandbox!

## commitlint

The team has also agreed to use commitlint-style commit messages. Install and enable
[commitlint](https://github.com/conventional-changelog/commitlint) to have your commits
validated systematically.

Commitlint commits look like this:

    type(optional-scope): subject (i.e., short description)

    optional body, which is free form

    optional footer

Valid types: (these are the default, which we're using as is for now)
 - build: commits for the build system
 - chore: maintain the repo, not the code itself
 - ci: commits for the continuous integration system
 - docs: adding and changing documentation
 - feat: adding a new feature
 - fix: fixing something
 - perf: improving performance
 - refactor: refactor code
 - revert: undo a previous change
 - style: working only on code or documentation style
 - test: commits for testing code

Valid scopes: the scope is optional and usually refers to which module is being changed.
 - TBD - for now not validated, should be just one word ideally

Valid subject: short, free form, what the commit is about in less than 50 or 60 characters
(not strictly enforced, but it's best to keep it short)

Optional body: this is where you put all the verbose details you want about the commit, or
nothing at all if the subject already says it all. Must be separated by a blank line from
the subject. Explain what the changes are, why you're doing them, etc, as necessary.

Optional footer: separated from the body (or subject if body is empty) by a blank line,
lists reference (e.g.: "Closes #12" "Ref #24") or warns of breaking changes (e.g.,
"BREAKING CHANGE: explanation").

These rules are inspired by these commit formatting guides:
 - [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)
 - [Bluejava commit guide](https://github.com/bluejava/git-commit-guide)
 - [develar's commit message format](https://gist.github.com/develar/273e2eb938792cf5f86451fbac2bcd51)
 - [AngularJS Git Commit Message Conventions](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QrDFcIiPjSLDn3EL15IJygNPiHORgU1_OOAqWjiDU5Y).

### Enabling commitlint

We run commitlint on each commit message that you write by enabling the commit-msg hook in
Git. It is run via [husky](https://www.npmjs.com/package/husky), which is a JS Git hook
manager, and you need Node to run it.

If you don't already use Node, this is a bit more work to install than the pre-commit
hooks above, but please take a moment to do this:

- If you don't already use Node or nvm, or if you don't have admin access to the system
  version of node, install nvm in your ~/.nvm folder:
```sh
wget -qO- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.35.3/install.sh | bash
```
This will add a few lines to your `.bashrc` file, which you'll need to execute now,
possibly by starting a new shell.

- Install Node:
```sh
nvm install node
```

- In your ReadAlong/Studio sandbox, install the husky commit-msg hook using npm, the node
  package manager you just installed using nvm. The file `package.json` in Studio is what
  tells npm to install husky as a pre-commit hook, and also what tells husky to invoke
  commitlint on your commit messages.
```sh
npm install
```

- Now, next time you make a change and commit it, your commit log will be checked:
  - `git commit -m'non-compliant commit log text'` outputs an error
  - `git commit -m'fix(g2p): fixing a bug in g2p integration'` works

Commit message:

style: replace commitlint by gitlint
gitlint is pure python, whereas commitlint is JavaScript and required
node. Thus, we completely remove the dependency on Node and instead use
our dev dependency mechanism that we already had in place.

Plus, gitlint prompts you when you commit is not compliant instead of
aborting right away, which I think is nicer.

Contributing.md, after:

# Contributing to ReadAlong Studio

Feel free to dive in! [Open an issue](https://github.com/ReadAlongs/Studio/issues/new) or submit PRs.

This repo follows the [Contributor Covenant](http://contributor-covenant.org/version/1/3/0/) Code of Conduct.

This repo uses automated tools to standardize the formatting of code, text files and
commits.
 - [Pre-commit hooks](#pre-commit-hooks) validate and automatically apply code
   formatting rules.
 - [commitlint](#commitlint) is used as a commit message hook to validate that
   commit messages follow the convention.

## TL;DR

Run these commands in each of your sandboxes to enable our pre-commit hooks and commitlint:

```sh
pip install -r requirements.dev.txt
pre-commit install
gitlint install-hook
```

## Pre-commit hooks

The ReadAlong Studio team has agreed to systematically use a number of pre-commit hooks to
normalize formatting of code. You need to install and enable pre-commit to have these used
automatically when you do your own commits.

Pre-commit hooks enabled:
- check-yaml validates YAML files
- end-of-file-fixer makes sure each text file ends with exactly one newline character
- trailing-whitespace removes superfluous whitespace at the end of lines in text files
- [Flake8](https://flake8.pycqa.org/) enforces good Python style rules; more info about
  using Flake8 in pre-commit hooks at:
  [Lj Miranda flake8 blog post](https://ljvmiranda921.github.io/notebook/2018/06/21/precommits-using-black-and-flake8/)
- [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/) orders python imports in a standard way
- [Black](https://github.com/psf/black), the Uncompromising Code Formatter, refortmats all
  Python code according to very strict rules we've agreed to follow; more info about Black
  formatting rules in
  [The Black code style](https://black.readthedocs.io/en/stable/the_black_code_style.html)
- [mypy](http://mypy-lang.org/) runs type checking for any statically-typed Python code in
  the repo

### Enabling pre-commit hooks

All the pre-commit hooks are executed using a tool called
[pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/). Once you enable pre-commit, it will run all the
hooks each time you try to commit anything in this repo.

We've listed all the developper dependencies for the project in
[requirements.dev.txt](requirements.dev.txt) to make them easy to install:

```sh
pip install -r requirements.dev.txt
pre-commit install
```

Note that you have to run the second command in every Studio sandbox you create, so please
don't forget to do so when you clone a new sandbox!

## commitlint

The team has also agreed to use [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/).
Install and enable [gitlint](https://jorisroovers.com/gitlint/) to have your
commit messages scanned automatically.

Convential commits look like this:

    type(optional-scope): subject (i.e., short description)

    optional body, which is free form

    optional footer

Valid types: (these are the default, which we're using as is for now)
 - build: commits for the build system
 - chore: maintain the repo, not the code itself
 - ci: commits for the continuous integration system
 - docs: adding and changing documentation
 - feat: adding a new feature
 - fix: fixing something
 - perf: improving performance
 - refactor: refactor code
 - revert: undo a previous change
 - style: working only on code or documentation style
 - test: commits for testing code

Valid scopes: the scope is optional and usually refers to which module is being changed.
 - TBD - for now not validated, should be just one word ideally

Valid subject: short, free form, what the commit is about in less than 50 or 60 characters
(not strictly enforced, but it's best to keep it short)

Optional body: this is where you put all the verbose details you want about the commit, or
nothing at all if the subject already says it all. Must be separated by a blank line from
the subject. Explain what the changes are, why you're doing them, etc, as necessary.

Optional footer: separated from the body (or subject if body is empty) by a blank line,
lists reference (e.g.: "Closes #12" "Ref #24") or warns of breaking changes (e.g.,
"BREAKING CHANGE: explanation").

These rules are inspired by these commit formatting guides:
 - [Conventional Commits](https://www.conventionalcommits.org/)
 - [Bluejava commit guide](https://github.com/bluejava/git-commit-guide)
 - [develar's commit message format](https://gist.github.com/develar/273e2eb938792cf5f86451fbac2bcd51)
 - [AngularJS Git Commit Message Conventions](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1QrDFcIiPjSLDn3EL15IJygNPiHORgU1_OOAqWjiDU5Y).

### Enabling commitlint

You can run commitlint on each commit message that you write by enabling the
commit-msg hook in Git.

Run this command in your g2p sandbox to install and enable the commit-msg hook:

```sh
pip install -r requirements/requirements.dev.txt
gitlint install-hook
```

- Now, next time you make a change and commit it, your commit log will be checked:
  - `git commit -m'non-compliant commit log text'` outputs an error
  - `git commit -m'fix(g2p): fixing a bug in g2p integration'` works
