readme-heroku.md, before:

Our production Heroku deployment is controlled by the following files:
 - `Procfile`: tells Heroku what command to launch in each Dyno;
 - `.python-version`: tells Heroku which run-time engine to use (i.e., which version of Python);
 - `requirements.txt`: tells Heroku what our production dependencies are;
 - `bin/post_compile`: Heroku builds run this after doing `pip install -r requirements.txt`.

Updating dependencies:
 - Our dependencies are declared in `pyproject.toml`. This is where changes should be made first.
 - `requirements.txt` is the generated "lock" file that Heroku uses. To update it,
   run these commands, preferably from a Linux machine to match the Heroku context:

       hatch env remove prod
       rm requirements.txt
       hatch env create prod

   Then manually remove the soundswallower line, since it's not needed for the web api.

   It is also possible to edit it manually, e.g., to handle a critical vulnerability report,
   but an occasional full rebuild is a good idea, to keep things up to date.

Updating `g2p`:
 - By default, `g2p` only gets updated for `readalong-studio` on Heroku when:
   - we make a new release of `g2p` on PyPI, **and**
   - we update `requirements.txt` here to ask for that release
 - Manual override: it is also possible to update g2p to the current commit on the `main` branch using this procedure:
   - Change `requirements.txt` to specify `g2p @ git+https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p@main`.
   - Commit that change to `main` in a sandbox connected to Heroku.
   - `git push heroku main`
   - This will force a build which will fetch the main branch of g2p from GitHub.
   - Subsequent builds reuse the cached g2p, so they'll reuse this one. Exception: if `.python-version` is updated, a fresh build is done and g2p will be reverted to the latest published version.

Commit message:

docs: clarify how to update requirements.txt

readme-heroku.md, after:

Our production Heroku deployment is controlled by the following files:
 - `Procfile`: tells Heroku what command to launch in each Dyno;
 - `.python-version`: tells Heroku which run-time engine to use (i.e., which version of Python);
 - `requirements.txt`: tells Heroku what our production dependencies are;
 - `bin/post_compile`: Heroku builds run this after doing `pip install -r requirements.txt`.

Updating dependencies:
 - Our dependencies are declared in `pyproject.toml`. This is where changes should be made first.
 - `requirements.txt` is the generated "lock" file that Heroku uses. To update it,
   run these commands on a **Linux** machine to match the Heroku context:

       pip install hatch hatch-pip-compile
       hatch env remove prod
       rm requirements.txt
       hatch env create prod

   Then manually do the following edits, and commit `requirements.txt` when you're done:
    - remove the soundswallower line, since it's not needed for the web api;
    - replace the g2p line by `g2p @ git+https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p.git@main` because we
      always want to deploy on Heroku with the latest g2p main branch.

   It is also possible to edit it manually, e.g., to handle a critical vulnerability report,
   but an occasional full rebuild is a good idea, to keep things up to date.

Updating `g2p`:
 - By default, `g2p` only gets updated for `readalong-studio` on Heroku when:
   - we make a new release of `g2p` on PyPI, **and**
   - we update `requirements.txt` here to ask for that release
 - Manual override: it is also possible to update g2p to the current commit on the `main` branch using this procedure:
   - Change `requirements.txt` to specify `g2p @ git+https://github.com/roedoejet/g2p@main`.
   - Commit that change to `main` in a sandbox connected to Heroku.
   - `git push heroku main`
   - This will force a build which will fetch the main branch of g2p from GitHub.
   - Subsequent builds reuse the cached g2p, so they'll reuse this one. Exception: if `.python-version` is updated, a fresh build is done and g2p will be reverted to the latest published version.
